:blogpost: true

NFA v0.8.0 and NFR v0.6.0: Compare plugin severity
==================================================

.. post:: 2025-06-28 16:43:40
   :tags: nfr nfa
   :category: tools
   :author: Damian

I'm excited to introduce a powerful new feature in **nessus file analyzer (NFA) v0.8.0** and **nessus file reader (NFR) v0.6.0**.  
Now you can effortlessly compare severity scores assigned to Nessus plugins, including Severity, Risk Factor, |CVSSv2| |CVSSv3| |CVSSv4|, |VPR|, and |EPSS| — all in a single view.

What's New?
-----------

In **nessus file analyzer (NFA)** in the *vulnerabilities* report and in **nessus file reader (NFR)** with ``nfr scan --plugin-severity`` command, you can now:

- Compare severity metadata for each plugin across multiple scoring systems.
- Easily identify inconsistencies or patterns between |CVSSv2|, |CVSSv3|, |CVSSv4|, |VPR|, and |EPSS| values.
- In **nessus file reader (NFR)** you can use powerful `JMESPath <https://jmespath.org>`_ to filter on specific Plugin IDs or other conditions.

Examples
--------

In **nessus file analyzer (NFA)** in the *vulnerabilities* report, instead of just a *Risk Factor* you will see additional 12 columns:

+---------------+--------+-----------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+---------+------+------+------+
|Severity number|Severity|Risk Factor|CVSSv2 Base Score|CVSSv2|CVSSv3 Base Score|CVSSv3|CVSSv4 Base Score|CVSSv4|VPR Score|VPR   |EPSS  |EPSS %|
+===============+========+===========+=================+======+=================+======+=================+======+=========+======+======+======+
|1              |Low     |Low        |2.6              |Low   |3.7              |Low   |                 |      |1.4      |Low   |0.0307|3.1%  |
+---------------+--------+-----------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+---------+------+------+------+
|2              |Medium  |Medium     |5.8              |Medium|6.5              |Medium|                 |      |4.9      |Medium|0.0596|6.0%  |
+---------------+--------+-----------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+---------+------+------+------+
|1              |Low     |Low        |2.1              |Low   |                 |      |                 |      |2.2      |Low   |0.0037|0.4%  |
+---------------+--------+-----------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+-----------------+------+---------+------+------+------+


In **nessus file reader (NFR)**, you will see them as well, run NFR as in below example::

   nfr scan --plugin-severity 192_168_1_1_1022nb.nessus

You'll get a tabular summary like:

::

   File name                  Report host name       PID    S  SL      RF        CVSSv2  CVSSv2L      CVSSv3  CVSSv3L    CVSSv4    CVSSv4L      VPR  VPRL      EPSS  EPSS%
   -------------------------  ------------------  ------  ---  ------  ------  --------  ---------  --------  ---------  --------  ---------  -----  ------  ------  -------
   192_168_1_1_1022nb.nessus  192.168.1.10         12217    2  Medium  Medium       5    Medium          5.3  Medium
   192_168_1_1_1022nb.nessus  192.168.1.10         42263    2  Medium  Medium       5.8  Medium          6.5  Medium
   192_168_1_1_1022nb.nessus  192.168.1.10         50686    2  Medium  Medium       5.8  Medium          6.5  Medium                            4.9  Medium  0.0596  6.0%

To see columns descriptions just run::

   nfr scan --plugin-severity-legend

It will print a clear legend explaining each column.

Filter with Precision
---------------------

While in the spreadsheet generated by **nessus file analyzer (NFA)** you can filter pretty easily, it's not so easy to do in a terminal. In **nessus file reader (NFR)**, thanks to the new ``--filter`` option, you can apply custom filters using `JMESPath <https://jmespath.org>`_.

Examples:

- Show only a specific plugin::

    nfr scan --plugin-severity *.nessus -f "[?PID == '50686']"

- Show only plugins with |VPR| scores::

    nfr scan --plugin-severity file.nessus -f "[?VPR != null]"

.. seealso::

   Check out more examples in the documentation: :ref:`nfr-scan-filter`.


Python Module
-------------

For those who use **nessus file reader (NFR)** as a Python module to create their own view there are new functions for plugins:

- ``severity_number_to_label(severity_number)`` - Convert a numeric severity level to its corresponding string label.
- ``cvssv2_score_to_severity(cvss_score)`` - Convert a |CVSS| v2 base score to its corresponding severity label.
- ``cvssv3_score_to_severity(cvss_score)`` - Convert a |CVSS| v3 base score to its corresponding severity label.
- ``cvssv4_score_to_severity(cvss_score)`` - Convert a |CVSS| v4 base score to its corresponding severity label.
- ``vpr_score_to_severity(vpr_score)`` - Convert a |VPR| score to its corresponding severity label.
- ``epss_score_decimal_to_percent(epss_score)`` - Convert an |EPSS| score from decimal format to a percentage string.

|TLDR|
------

Thank to the newest **nessus file analyzer (NFA)** and **nessus file reader (NFR)** you can:

- Quickly compare how multiple scoring systems rank a plugi's risk.
- Improve prioritization and remediation efforts by analyzing |VPR| and |EPSS| alongside |CVSS| scores.

**nessus file analyzer (NFA)**: 

- check the *vulnerabilities* report for new columns.

**nessus file reader (NFR)** :

- run ``nfr scan --plugin-severity your_file_name.nessus``. 
- Apply flexible filters with `JMESPath <https://jmespath.org>`_ using ``-f`` or ``--filter``.
- Use new functions in Python module to analyze plugin severities programmatically.

.. seealso::

   Check out new **NFR** feature in the documentation: :ref:`nfr-scan-plugin-severity`.
   
   Check out new **NFA** columns details in :doc:`../tools/nessus-file-analyzer/target-file/section-vulnerabilities`.

.. important:: 
   
   :ref:`nfa-upgrade` to **NFA v0.8.0** (including **NFR v0.6.0**) and supercharge your vulnerability scan analysis.

   If you use only **nessus file reader (NFR)**:
   :ref:`nfr-upgrade` it to **NFR v0.6.0** and supercharge your vulnerability scan analysis just in |CLI| and Python.

